Blog/adding fonts (#155)
infinum/eightshift-docs: website/blog/2022-04-08-adding-fonts.md

---
title: Adding fonts
description: An intro to adding fonts to your project.
slug: adding-fonts
authors: iobrado
date: 2022-04-12
tags: [eightshift, boilerplate, fonts]
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

> Each project is different in its way. Logo, various fonts, etc. are what define the visual identity of your website. In this post, we'll cover adding fonts to a project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Every project is unique. Logo, colors, fonts, etc. are what define the visual identity of your website. In this post, we'll cover adding fonts to a project.
```

<!--truncate-->

> ### Importing fonts into your project

Reviewer 2: I see that this is the case in previous blog posts as well, but I believe that this should be an `h2`, not an `h3`

> [Our documentation](/docs/basics/fonts) covers the required steps to add a font to your project, but here we'll cover the process in a bit more detail. To even start, we need a font (or two). For this example, I'll use **_SourceSansPro_** and **_NotoSerif_** downloaded from [Google Fonts](https://fonts.google.com/). These are in `.ttf` format, so convert them to `.woff` and `.woff2` however you can. We recommend the following tools:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Our documentation](/docs/basics/fonts) covers the necessary steps to add a font to your project, but here we'll cover the process in a bit more detail. To start, we need a font (or two). For this example, I'll use **_SourceSansPro_** and **_NotoSerif_** which I've downloaded from [Google Fonts](https://fonts.google.com/). These are in the `.ttf` format, so convert them to `.woff` and `.woff2. Whatever approach you use is okay - we recommend the following tools:
```

> [Our documentation](/docs/basics/fonts) covers the required steps to add a font to your project, but here we'll cover the process in a bit more detail. To even start, we need a font (or two). For this example, I'll use **_SourceSansPro_** and **_NotoSerif_** downloaded from [Google Fonts](https://fonts.google.com/). These are in `.ttf` format, so convert them to `.woff` and `.woff2` however you can. We recommend the following tools:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Our documentation](/docs/basics/fonts) covers the required steps to add a font to your project, but here we'll cover the process in a bit more detail. To even start, we need a font (or two). For this example, I'll use **_Source Sans Pro_** and **_Noto Serif_** downloaded from [Google Fonts](https://fonts.google.com/). These are in `.ttf` format (you may find some which are `.otf`, which will work in the same way), so convert them to `.woff` and `.woff2` any way you can. We recommend the following tools:
```

> - https://convertio.co/ttf-woff/

Reviewer: Maybe convert these to links with the text being the website's name/title?

- https://cloudconvert.com/ttf-to-woff
- https://everythingfonts.com/ttf-to-woff

> Fonts should go inside the **_/assets/fonts_** folder inside your theme. Paste the fonts you want to use there. You will also notice that this folder contains an **_index.js_** file. This file is used to import fonts into your project. Here's an example of how I imported my fonts:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Fonts should go inside your theme's **_/assets/fonts_** folder. Copy the fonts you want to use there. You will also notice that this folder contains an **_index.js_** file. This file is used to import fonts into your project. Here's an example of how I imported my fonts:
```

> Fonts should go inside the **_/assets/fonts_** folder inside your theme. Paste the fonts you want to use there. You will also notice that this folder contains an **_index.js_** file. This file is used to import fonts into your project. Here's an example of how I imported my fonts:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Paste your fonts in the theme's **_/assets/fonts_** folder. You will also notice that this folder contains an **_index.js_** file, used to import fonts into your project. Here's an example of how I imported my fonts:
```
Seems redundant 😄

```js
// SourceSansPro WOFF

> import './SourceSansPro-Bold.woff';

Reviewer: Maybe we should not mention WOFF, because it's only there to fallback for IE11, all the other browser support WOFF2 😄

Reviewer 3: Maybe just add a line explaining that if you don't need to support IE11, don't include `.woff` files to save bandwidth.

Reviewer: @gabriel-glo I guess the latest Boilerplate and this whole article wouldn't work with IE11 anyways (because CSS variables), but I guess just noting that `.woff` can be left out is fine 😄

import './SourceSansPro-BoldItalic.woff';
import './SourceSansPro-Italic.woff';
import './SourceSansPro-Regular.woff';
import './SourceSansPro-Light.woff';
import './SourceSansPro-LightItalic.woff';

// SourceSansPro WOFF2
import './SourceSansPro-Bold.woff2';
import './SourceSansPro-BoldItalic.woff2';
import './SourceSansPro-Italic.woff2';
import './SourceSansPro-Regular.woff2';
import './SourceSansPro-Light.woff2';
import './SourceSansPro-LightItalic.woff2';

// NotoSerif WOFF
import './NotoSerif-Bold.woff';
import './NotoSerif-BoldItalic.woff';
import './NotoSerif-Italic.woff';
import './NotoSerif-Regular.woff';

// NotoSerif WOFF2
import './NotoSerif-Bold.woff2';
import './NotoSerif-BoldItalic.woff2';
import './NotoSerif-Italic.woff2';
import './NotoSerif-Regular.woff2';
```

To add these fonts as your base font and secondary font, go to the global manifest located in **_/src/Blocks_** and add the following inside `globalVariables`:
```json
"globalVariables": {

> 	//...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	// ...
```

	"baseFont": "SourceSansPro",
	"secondaryFont": "NotoSerif",

> 	//...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	// ...
```

}
```

> Next, you can create a new file called **__typography.scss_** inside your **_/assets/styles/parts/utils/_** folder and add the following:

Reviewer 2: Maybe explain why this is used and what these mixins are.

Reviewer 4: Or just link to the sassdoc chapter for `font-face` mixin.

```scss
@include font-face(global-settings(baseFont), 'SourceSansPro-Light', 300);
@include font-face(global-settings(baseFont), 'SourceSansPro-LightItalic', 300, italic);
@include font-face(global-settings(baseFont), 'SourceSansPro-Regular', 400);
@include font-face(global-settings(baseFont), 'SourceSansPro-Italic', 400, italic);
@include font-face(global-settings(baseFont), 'SourceSansPro-Bold', 700);
@include font-face(global-settings(baseFont), 'SourceSansPro-BoldItalic', 700, italic);

@include font-face(global-settings(secondaryFont), 'NotoSerif-Bold', 700);
@include font-face(global-settings(secondaryFont), 'NotoSerif-BoldItalic', 700, italic);
@include font-face(global-settings(secondaryFont), 'NotoSerif-Italic', 400, italic);
@include font-face(global-settings(secondaryFont), 'NotoSerif-Regular', 400);
```

> Because this is a new file, we have to include it. You can do that inside **_/assets/styles/parts/_shared.scss_** file:

Reviewer 2: Please escape the `_` in `_shared.scss` in case Docusaurus change their Markdown parser in the future.

```scss
// Project specific.
@import 'utils/shared-variables';
@import 'utils/typography';
```

Run `npm start` to rebuild your **_public_** folder and assets. If you did everything correctly, your build should pass and you will see your fonts inside the **_public_** folder.

### Using only one font in a block

> There are multiple ways of using fonts in a block. The simplest example is if you have only one font you want to use for that specific block. In this case, we want Heading Block to only use NotoSerif.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are multiple ways of using fonts in a block. The simplest example is if you have only one font you want to use for that specific block. In this case, we want the Heading block to only use _Noto Serif_.
```

> To make our secondary font available for use, first we need to define it as a variable. We can do that in **_/assets/styles/parts/utils/_shared-variables.scss_**. Here we can see that the base font is already defined, so all we need to do is add our secondary font below.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To make our secondary font available for use, we need to first define it as a variable. We can do that in **_/assets/styles/parts/utils/_shared-variables.scss_**. We can see there that the base font is already defined, so all we need to do is add our secondary font below.
```

> To make things a bit more complicated, we may also want to rename `--global-font-family` CSS variable to `--base-font-family`. Just don't forget to search/replace this new variable name across your project! Once we're done, it should look like this:

Reviewer 2: > To make things a bit more complicated

Truly a great motivation for doing anything 😂

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To make things a bit more consistent, we may also want to rename `--global-font-family` CSS variable to `--base-font-family`. Just don't forget to search/replace this new variable name across your project! Once we're done, it should look like this:
```

Author: Oh, that's the word I've been looking for! 😄  I didn't like how it sounded, since it's not THAT complicated, but couldn't think of anything better at the moment 😅

```scss

> 	--base-font-family: var(--global-base-font), -apple-system, BlinkMacSystemFont, 'Segoe UI', Roboto, Helvetica,

Reviewer: Maybe we should note here that the fallbacks for the font can be anything, not strictly the ones listed here.

		Arial, sans-serif, 'Apple Color Emoji', 'Segoe UI Emoji', 'Segoe UI Symbol';

	--secondary-font-family: var(--global-secondary-font), -apple-system, BlinkMacSystemFont, 'Segoe UI', Roboto, Helvetica,
		Arial, sans-serif, 'Apple Color Emoji', 'Segoe UI Emoji', 'Segoe UI Symbol';
```

> After defining `--secondary-font-family` CSS variable, we can go to **_/src/Blocks/components/heading/heading-style.scss_** and add the following line inside `.heading` class:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After defining `--secondary-font-family` CSS variable, we can go to **_/src/Blocks/components/heading/heading-style.scss_** and add the following rule to the `.heading` class:
```

> After defining `--secondary-font-family` CSS variable, we can go to **_/src/Blocks/components/heading/heading-style.scss_** and add the following line inside `.heading` class:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After defining the `--secondary-font-family` CSS variable, we can go to **_/src/Blocks/components/heading/heading-style.scss_** and add the following line inside the `.heading` class:
```

```scss
	font-family: var(--secondary-font-family);
```

> And that's it! The Heading Block will now use the NotoSerif font.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And that's it! The Heading Block will now use the Noto Serif font.
```

> And that's it! The Heading Block will now use the NotoSerif font.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And that's it! The Heading block will now use the _Noto Serif_ font.
```

### Adding an option for selecting fonts

> In some cases, you may want to give users the option to choose between fonts that they want to use in their block. For this example, we'll use the `paragraph` block where we want users to have both SourceSansPro and NotoSerif font available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In some cases, you may want to give users the option to choose between fonts that they want to use in their block. For this example, we'll use the `paragraph` block where we want users to have both _Source Sans Pro_ and _Noto Serif_ available.
```

First step is to add a new attribute, options and CSS variable values in **_/src/Blocks/components/paragraph/manifest.json_**:
```json

> //...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
// ...
```

	"attributes": {

> 		//...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		// ...
```

		"paragraphFontFamily": {
			"type": "string",
			"default": "base"
		}
	},
	"options": {

> 		//...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		// ...
```

		"paragraphFontFamily": [
			{
				"label": "SourceSansPro",
				"value": "base"
			},
			{
				"label": "NotoSerif",
				"value": "secondary"
			}
		],

> 		//...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		// ...
```

	}
```

> After defining a new attribute and options, we now have to add a variable to **_manifest.json_**. We can add it inside `variables`. This approach is slightly different from the one explained in [Modifying blocks](/blog/modifying-blocks) blog post. Here we can use `%value%` wildcard to dynamically add the selected value to our CSS variable.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After defining a new attribute and options for the font family, we now have to add a variable to **_manifest.json_**. We can add it to the `variables` object. This approach is slightly different from the one explained in the [Modifying blocks](/blog/modifying-blocks) blog post. Here we can use `%value%` wildcard to dynamically add the selected value to our CSS variable.
```

```json
"paragraphFontFamily": [
	{
		"variable": {
			"paragraph-font-family": "var(--%value%-font-family)"
		}
	}
]
```

> The next step is to go to **_/src/Blocks/components/paragraph/components/paragraph-options.js_** and add the new option for selecting fonts. The first thing we can add is a new attribute that will allow us to toggle showing the paragraph font family option on other blocks which are using the paragraph. There may be a case where we want only one font family, so this option may come in handy on some other blocks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The next step is to go to **_/src/Blocks/components/paragraph/components/paragraph-options.js_** and add a control for the new font family option. The first thing we can add is a new attribute that will allow us to toggle showing the paragraph font family option on other blocks which are using the paragraph component. There might be a case where we want only one font family, so this option may come in handy in some other blocks.
```

```js
const {
		setAttributes,
		//...
		showParagraphFontFamily = true,
	} = attributes;
```

> After that, we need to fetch either the saved attribute value or get the default one from the manifest. We can do that with `checkAttr` helper and add it just below `paragraphColor` and `paragraphSize`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After that, we need to fetch either the saved attribute value or get the default one from the manifest. We can do that with the `checkAttr` helper, adding it just below `paragraphColor` and `paragraphSize`.
```

```js
	const paragraphFontFamily = checkAttr('paragraphFontFamily', attributes, manifest);
```

> Now we have to add an actual option to the return statement which will allow us to choose between fonts.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now we have to add an actual control to the return statement which will allow us to choose between fonts.
```

```suggestion
Now we have to add an actual control to the options panel which will allow us to choose between fonts.
```

```js
	return (

> 		//...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		// ...
```

		{showParagraphFontFamily &&
			<CustomSelect
				label={<IconLabel icon={icons.fontFamily} label={__('Font Family', 'eightshift-theme')} />}
				value={paragraphFontFamily}
				options={getOption('paragraphFontFamily', attributes, manifest)}
				onChange={(value) => setAttributes({ [getAttrKey('paragraphFontFamily', attributes, manifest)]: value })}
				isClearable={false}
				isSearchable={false}
				simpleValue
			/>
		}

> 		//...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
		// ...
```

	);
```

> The option for selecting a font should now be available under Paragraph options. Saving the option now works, but the font stays the same both in the editor and on the frontend. The final step we need to make this work is to add a CSS variable to **_/src/Blocks/components/paragraph/paragraph-style.scss_**:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The option for selecting a font should now be available under Paragraph options. Saving the option now works, but the font stays the same both in the editor and on the frontend. The final step we need to make this work is to add a CSS rule to **_/src/Blocks/components/paragraph/paragraph-style.scss_**:
```

or even

```suggestion
The control for selecting a font should now be available under Paragraph options. Saving the choice now works, but the font stays the same both in the editor and on the frontend. The final step we need to make this work is to add a CSS rule that consumes our variable to **_/src/Blocks/components/paragraph/paragraph-style.scss_**:
```

```scss
.paragraph {

> 	//...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	// ...
```

	font-family: var(--paragraph-font-family, var(--base-font-family));

> 	//...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
	// ...
```

}
```

After adding this single line of CSS code, your new option for selecting fonts will now be fully functional.

### Closing thoughts

> Adding fonts to a project is something you will usually do only when setting up a new project and then forget about it. As you could see in this blog post, this isn't a complicated process, but it has a specific set of steps that have to be taken to make custom fonts work in your project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Adding fonts to a project is something you will usually only do when setting up a new project and then forget about it. As you could see in this blog post, this isn't a complicated process, but it has a specific set of steps that have to be taken in order for custom fonts to work in your project.
```

> Of course, there are other ways to include fonts in your project, but the described process is the recommended one and is used by our team. This is the (Eightshift) Way.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Of course, there are other ways to include fonts in your project, but the described process is what we recommend and use. This is the (Eightshift) Way.
```

---
title: Adding fonts
description: An intro to adding fonts to your project.
slug: adding-fonts
authors: iobrado
date: 2022-04-12
tags: [eightshift, boilerplate, fonts]
hide_table_of_contents: false
---

Every project is unique. Logo, colors, fonts, etc. are what define the visual identity of your website. In this post, we'll cover adding fonts to a project.
<!--truncate-->

## Importing fonts into your project

> [Our documentation](/docs/basics/fonts) covers the necessary steps to add a font to your project, but here we'll cover the process in a bit more detail. To start, we need a font (or two). For this example, I'll use **_Source Sans Pro_** and **_Noto Serif_** which I've downloaded from [Google Fonts](https://fonts.google.com/). They are in the `.ttf` format (you may find some which are `.otf`, which will work in the same way), so you need to convert them to `.woff` and `.woff2`. Whatever approach you use is okay - we recommend the following tools:

Reviewer 3: I'd add a note at the end that says:

> Just make sure you have the proper license for the fonts you are converting.

I think that [font squirrel](https://www.fontsquirrel.com/) would even prevent you from converting fonts that are premium.

@include font-face(global-settings(baseFont), 'SourceSansPro-Italic', 400, italic);
@include font-face(global-settings(baseFont), 'SourceSansPro-Bold', 700);
@include font-face(global-settings(baseFont), 'SourceSansPro-BoldItalic', 700, italic);

@include font-face(global-settings(secondaryFont), 'NotoSerif-Bold', 700);
@include font-face(global-settings(secondaryFont), 'NotoSerif-BoldItalic', 700, italic);
@include font-face(global-settings(secondaryFont), 'NotoSerif-Italic', 400, italic);
@include font-face(global-settings(secondaryFont), 'NotoSerif-Regular', 400);
```
If you would like to know more about the `font-face` mixin, you can take a look at our [Sass documentation](/sass).

Because this is a new file, we have to include it. You can do that inside **_/assets/styles/parts/\_shared.scss_** file:
```scss
// Project specific.
@import 'utils/shared-variables';
@import 'utils/typography';
```

Run `npm start` to rebuild your **_public_** folder and assets. If you did everything correctly, your build should pass and you will see your fonts inside the **_public_** folder.

## Using only one font in a block

> There are multiple ways of using fonts in a block. The simplest example is if you have only one font you want to use for that specific block. In this case, we want the Heading block to only use _Noto Serif_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are multiple ways of using fonts in a block. The simplest use case is if you have only one font you want to use for that specific block. In this case, we want the Heading block to only use _Noto Serif_.
```

> To make our secondary font available for use, we need to first define it as a variable. We can do that in **_/assets/styles/parts/utils/\_shared-variables.scss_**. We can see there that the base font is already defined, so all we need to do is add our secondary font below.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To make our secondary font available for use, we need to first define it as a variable. We can do that in **_/assets/styles/parts/utils/\_shared-variables.scss_**. We can see that the base font is already defined there, so all we need to do is add our secondary font below it.
```

> To make our secondary font available for use, we need to first define it as a variable. We can do that in **_/assets/styles/parts/utils/\_shared-variables.scss_**. We can see there that the base font is already defined, so all we need to do is add our secondary font below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To make our secondary font available for use, we need to first define it as a CSS variable. We can do that in **_/assets/styles/parts/utils/\_shared-variables.scss_**. The base font is already defined, so all we need to do is add our secondary font definition below.
```
(2 sentences starting with _We_ in a row)

		Arial, sans-serif, 'Apple Color Emoji', 'Segoe UI Emoji', 'Segoe UI Symbol';
```
After defining the `--secondary-font-family` CSS variable, we can go to **_/src/Blocks/components/heading/heading-style.scss_** and add the following rule to the `.heading` class:
```scss
	font-family: var(--secondary-font-family);
```

And that's it! The Heading block will now use the _Noto Serif_ font.

## Adding an option for selecting fonts

In some cases, you may want to give users the option to choose between fonts that they want to use in their block. For this example, we'll use the `paragraph` block where we want users to have both _Source Sans Pro_ and _Noto Serif_ available.

First step is to add a new attribute, options and CSS variable values in **_/src/Blocks/components/paragraph/manifest.json_**:
```json
// ...
	"attributes": {
		// ...
		"paragraphFontFamily": {
			"type": "string",
			"default": "base"
		}
	},
	"options": {
		// ...
		"paragraphFontFamily": [
			{
				"label": "SourceSansPro",
				"value": "base"
			},
			{
				"label": "NotoSerif",
				"value": "secondary"
			}
		],
		// ...
	}
```

> After defining a new attribute and options for the font family, we now have to add a variable to **_manifest.json_**. We can add it to the `variables` object. This approach is slightly different from the one explained in the [Modifying blocks](/blog/modifying-blocks) blog post. Here we can use `%value%` wildcard to dynamically add the selected value to our CSS variable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After defining the new attribute and options for the font family, we now have to add a variable to **_manifest.json_**. We can add it to the `variables` object. This approach is slightly different from the one explained in the [Modifying blocks](/blog/modifying-blocks) blog post. Here we can use `%value%` wildcard to dynamically add the selected value to our CSS variable.
```

```js
const {
		setAttributes,
		//...
		showParagraphFontFamily = true,
	} = attributes;
```

After that, we need to fetch either the saved attribute value or get the default one from the manifest. We can do that with the `checkAttr` helper, adding it just below `paragraphColor` and `paragraphSize`.
```js
	const paragraphFontFamily = checkAttr('paragraphFontFamily', attributes, manifest);
```

Now we have to add an actual control to the options panel which will allow us to choose between fonts.
```js
	return (
		// ...
		{showParagraphFontFamily &&
			<CustomSelect
				label={<IconLabel icon={icons.fontFamily} label={__('Font Family', 'eightshift-theme')} />}
				value={paragraphFontFamily}
				options={getOption('paragraphFontFamily', attributes, manifest)}
				onChange={(value) => setAttributes({ [getAttrKey('paragraphFontFamily', attributes, manifest)]: value })}
				isClearable={false}
				isSearchable={false}
				simpleValue
			/>
		}
		// ...
	);
```

> The control for selecting a font should now be available under Paragraph options. Saving the choice now works, but the font stays the same both in the editor and on the frontend. The final step we need to make this work is to add a CSS rule that consumes our variable to **_/src/Blocks/components/paragraph/paragraph-style.scss_**:

Reviewer 3: Add a screenshot of the control here, just to break all the text 🙏🏼 😄

```scss
.paragraph {
	// ...
	font-family: var(--paragraph-font-family, var(--base-font-family));
	// ...
}
```

After adding this single line of CSS code, your new option for selecting fonts will now be fully functional.

## Closing thoughts
Adding fonts to a project is something you will usually only do when setting up a new project and then forget about it. As you could see in this blog post, this isn't a complicated process, but it has a specific set of steps that have to be taken in order for custom fonts to work in your project.

> Of course, there are other ways to include fonts in your project, but the described process is what we recommend and use. This is the (Eightshift) Way.

Reviewer 3: ![maxresdefault](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/8638515/162902499-a8d36919-5cb8-408b-8cca-0d6201c1a1ce.jpeg)

😂
